
# Website

## Caddy
Caddy handles http requests and serves up html files
Forward proxy sits infront of the user and passes requests to the internet

Reverse proxy sits infront of the server and passes requests from the internet into the server


## HTTPS
Secure Hypertext Transport Protocol. HTTP with a negotiated secure connection. All data is encrypted using the TLS protocol. 

`Curl -v -s https://byu.edu > /dev/null` This shows the negotiation of the TLS protocol

### Web certificates
Generated by a trusted 3rd party using public/private key encryption. 

Using Let's Encrypt, and the IETF standard ACME protocol anyone can dynamically generate and renew a certificate for free.

Caddy uses Let's Encrypt to generate a web certificate every time a HTTPS request is made for a domain name that Caddy doesn't have a web certificate for.


## DNS

| Port    | Protocol                   |
| ------- | -------------------------- |
| **443** | HTTPS (secure web traffic) |
| **80**  | HTTP (regular web traffic) |
| **22**  | SSH (secure shell access)  |

# Command console

| Command | Purpose                                                                 |
| ------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `chmod` | Change file or directory **permissions**                                |
| `pwd`   | Print current **working directory**                                     |
| `cd`    | **Change directory**                                                    |
| `ls`    | **List** files and directories                                          |
| `vim`   | Open file in **Vim text editor**                                        |
| `nano`  | Open file in **Nano text editor**                                       |
| `mkdir` | **Make a directory**                                                    |
| `mv`    | **Move or rename** files/directories                                    |
| `rm`    | **Remove (delete)** files/directories                                   |
| `man`   | Show **manual/help** page for a command                                 |
| `ssh`   | Start a **remote shell session** (secure connection to another machine) |
| `ps`    | Show running **processes**                                              |
| `wget`  | **Download** files from the web via URL                                 |
| `sudo`  | Run a command with **superuser (admin)** privileges                     |


# HTML

## Structure
The two major purposes of HTML is to provide structure and content to your web application. Some of the common HTML structural elements include body, header, footer, main, section, aside, p, table, ol/ul, and span. The body has three children, a header, main, and footer

Block and inline elements

## Input Elements

- `form` Input container and submission
- `fieldset` Labeled input grouping
- `input` Multiple types of user input
- `select` Selection dropdown
- `optgroup` Grouped selection dropdown
- `option` Selection option
- `textarea`Multiline text input
- `label` individual input label
- `output` Output of input
- `meter` Display value with a known range

Input element
- text
- password
- email
- tel
- url
- number
- checkbox
- radio
- range
- date
- datetime-local
- month
- week
- color
- file
- submit

## Media Elements



# CSS
Box model
Order (inner → outer):

Content — the text, image, or other element’s actual data

Padding — space between content and the border

Border — wraps around the padding (and content)

Margin — space outside the border, separating from other elements

# Javascript

## Console
Useful when interacting with the debugger console. Similar to using print statements when debugging
- console.log('hello')
- You can format messages console.log('hello %s', 'world')
- You can specify CSS paramters to style the log output console.log('%c JavaScript Demo', 'font-size:1.5;')
### Timers
Counts a piece of codes runtime
```js
console.time('demo time')
for (let i = 0; i <10000000; i++) {}
console.timeEnd('demo time')
//OUTPUT: demo time: 12.74 ms
```
### Count
Counts how many times a block of code is called

```js
console.count('a') // a: 1
console.count('a')// a: 2
```

## DOM
getElementById()

Document Object Model is an object representation of the HTML elements. The browser provides access to the DOM through a global variable name `document`. 

### Accessing the DOM
querySelectorAll('p')
el.tagName
el.children

### Modifying the DOM

new =document.createElement

new.textContent = text;

parentElement.appendChild(new)

function deleteElement(elementSelector) {
  const el = document.querySelector(elementSelector);
  el.parentElement.removeChild(el);
}

deleteElement('#courses div');

### Injecting

const el = document.querySelector('div');
el.innerHTML = '<div class="injected"><b>Hello</b>!</div>';

### Event listeners



## Functions
Funcitons are first class objects.
- Assigned a name
- passed as a parameter
- returned as a result
- refernced from an object or array just like any other variable

```js
function hellow(who) {
    return 'hello ' + who;
}

console.log(hello('world'))
// OUTPUT: hello world
```
A function without a return value usually exist to produce some side effect like modifying a parameter or interacting with an external program

### Function paramters

When a function is called you choose the parameters to provide. If not provided the parameter is `undefined`
The function can also define a default value in a parameter

### Anonymous functions

Funtions in JavaScript are commonly assigned to a variable so that they can be passed as a parameter to some other function

```js
function doMath(operation, a, b) {
    return operation(a, b);
}

const add = function (a, b) {
    return a + b;
}

console.log(doMath(add, 5, 3));
// Output: 8

```
### Inner Functions
Funtions can be declared inside other functions

## Arrow Functions
Functions can be declared anywhere and passed as parameters. This results in code with lots of anonymous functions. To make the code more compact the `arrow` syntax was created. 

```js
() => 3;

const a = [1, 2, 3, 4]

// Equivalent functions

a.sort(function (v1, v2) {
    return v1 - v2;

});

a.sort((v1, v2) => v1 - v2);
```
If the arrow functions have curly braces than it works like a normal function and uses the `return` keyword

### Closure
Arrow functions inherit the `this` pointer from the scope in which they are created. This makes what is know as a `closure`. This allows a function to continue referencing its creation scope, even after it has passed out of that scope.

```js
function makeClosure(init) {
    let closureValue = int;
    return () => {
        return `closure ${++closureValue}`;
    };
}

const closure = makeClosure(0);

console.log(closure());
// OUTPUT: closure 1
console.log(closure());
// OUTPUT: closure 2
```

## Array

### Array Functions

- push `a.push(4)` Add an item to the end of the array
- pop `x = a.pop()` Remove an item from the end of the array
- slice `a.slice(1, -1)` Return a sub-array
- sort `a.sort((a, b) => b-a)` Run a function to sort an array in place
- values `for (i of a.values()) {...}` Creates an iterator for use with a `for of` loop
- find `a.find(i => i < 2)` Find the first item satisfied by a test function
- forEach `a.forEach(console.log)` Run a function on each array item
- reduce `a.reduce((a, c) => a + c)` Run a function to reduce each array item to a single item
- map `a.map(i => i+i)` Run a function to map an array to a new array
- filter `a.filter(i => i%2)` Run a function to remove items
- every `a.every(i => i < 3)` Run a function to test if all items match
- some `a.some(i => i < 1)` Run a function to test if any items match

## Objects and Classes

A JavaScript object represents a collection of name value pairs referred to as properties. The property name must be of type String or Symbol, but the value can be of any type. 
Objects have common object-oriented functionality
- `this` pointer
- static properties and functions
- inheritence

Objects are created with the new operator. This causes the object's constructor to be called. 

```js
const obj = new Object({a: 3});
obj['b'] = 'fish';
obj.c = [1, 2, 3];
obj.hello = function () {
    console.log('hello');
};

```

### Object-literals

You can declare a variable of object type with `object-literal` syntax.

```js
const obj = {
    a: 3,
    b: 'fish',
    c: { d: false},
    e: function () {
        return 'hello';
    },
};

```

### Object functions
- entries `Object.entries(obj)` Returns an array of key value pars
- keys `Object.keys(obj)` Returns an array of keys
- values `Object.values(obj)` Returns an array of values

### Constructor

Any funtion that returns a object is considered a `constructor` and can be invoked with the `new` operator

```js
function Person(name) {
    return {
        name: name,
        log: function () {
            console.log('My name is ' + this.name)
        }
    };
}

const p = new Person('Eich');
p.log();
// OUTPUT: {name: 'Eich'}
```
The `this` pointer refers to a pointer to the object.

### Classes
Using a Class clarifies the intent to create a reusable component rather than a one-off object. 

```js

class Person {
    constructor(name) {
        this.name = name;
    }
    
    log() {
        console.log('My name is ' + this.name)
    }
}
const p = new Person('Eich');
p.log();
//Same as previous object using class
```

Private functions and properties
- `#name`
- `this.#name = name;`

### Inheritance

Classes can be extend by using `extends` keyword to define inheritence
A parents function can be explicity accessed using `super` keyword and parameters that need to be passed to the parent class are also delivered by the `super`keyword

`super(name)`

`super.print()`

## Destructuring

Process of pulling individual items out of an existing one, or removing structure. You can do this with either arrays or objects. 

```js
const a = [1, 2, 3, 4];

const [b, c] = a;

console.log(b, c);
// OUTPUT: 1, 2

const [b, c, ...others] = a;
console.log(others);
// OUTPUT: [3, 4]
```

With objects you explicitly specify the properties you want to pull from the source object

## Timeout and Interval

If you want to delay the execution of something until after a certian period has expired. JavaScript supports this with the `setTimout` function. 

```js

setTimeout(() => console.log('time is up'), 2000);

console.log('timeout will happen later');

```
JavaScript code will still run until the delay expires when the callback function runs.

### setInterval

Works like setTimeout but will continuely call the function every time the delay has passed.

```js
setInterval(() => console.log('do something'), 1000);
```

```js
const interval = setInterval(() => console.log('do something'), 1000);

setTimeout(() => clearInterval(interval), 5000);
```

## JSON

JavaScript Object Notation was concieved by Douglas Crockford in 2001 while working at Yahoo! JSON, pronounced like the name Jason., recieved official standardization 2013 and 2017

JSON provides a simple, and yet effective way, to share and store data. By design JSON is easily convertible to, and from, JavaScript objects. This makes it a very convenient data format when working with web technologies. Because of its simplicity, standardization, and compatibility with JavaScript, JSON has become on of the world's most popular data formats.

A JSON document contains one of the following data types:
- string
- number
- boolean
- array
- object
- null

Most commonly, a JSON document contains an object.

### Converting to JavaScript
You can convert JSON to, and from, JavaScript using the JSON.parse and JSON.stringify functions

```js
const obj = { a: 2, b: 'crockford', c: undefined };
const json = JSON.stringify(obj);
const objFromJson = JSON.parse(json);

console.log(obj, json, objFromJson);

// OUTPUT:
// {a: 2, b: 'crockford', c: undefined}
// {"a":2, "b":"crockford"}
// {a: 2, b: 'crockford'}
```

## Local Storage
The browsers `localStorage` API provides the ability to persistently store and retrieve data on a user's browser across user sessions and HTML page renderings.

Four main functions that can be used with localStorage
- setItem(name, value) Sets a named item's value into local storage
- getItem(name) Gets a named item's value from local storage
- removeItem(name) Removes a named item from local storage
- clear() Clears all items in local storage


## React Hooks

React hooks allow React function style components to be able to do everything that a class style can do and more. This makes function style components the preferred way of doing things in React. 

`useState` hook  allows to declare and upadate state

`useEffect` hook allows you to represent lifecycle events. 

### UseEffect dependencies
You can control what triggers a useEffect hook by specifying its dependencies.

## Reactivity


# Web Service

##  The internet

A massive redundant collection of wires that connect up all the computers in the world

## Web Servers

### Combining web and application services

Your application is also the web service, 